[startPage=37]
Small Steps: 
The Year I Got Polio

Chapter 7: Star Patient Surprises Everyone (Part 2)

by Peg Kehret

Although I was delighted with every small accomplishment, I wondered why I got better and some of the other patients did not. Tommy might spend the rest of his life in the iron lung. It didn't seem fair.

I mentioned this to Dr. Bevis. "Some cases of polio are severe, and some are mild," he said. "When the polio virus completely destroys a nerve center, the muscles controlled by that center are paralyzed forever. If the damage is slight rather than total, the paralysis is temporary. Your muscles were severely weakened, but the nerve damage wasn't total. It's possible for weak muscles to gain back some of their strength."

"So Tommy's polio is worse than mine," I said.

"That's right. It also helped that your parents took you to the doctor right away. You were already here and diagnosed when you needed oxygen; some people who have respiratory polio are not that fortunate."

I remembered how hard it had been to breathe, and how much the oxygen tent had helped.
[endPage=37]

[startPage=38]
Dr. Bevis continued, "Most people think they have the flu and don't get medical help until paralysis sets in. By the time they learn they have polio, and get to a hospital that's equipped to treat them, the respiratory patients often have to go straight into an iron lung. They don't get hot packs or physical therapy until they can breathe on their own again, which might be several months later. The sooner the Sister Kenny treatments are started, the more they help." He smiled at me. "You are one lucky girl."

But it wasn't all luck, I thought; it was quick action by my parents. They helped create my good luck.

"I've been wondering something else, too," I said. "How did I get polio when not one other person in my town got it?"

"Many people have polio and never know it," Dr. Bevis said. "They are highly contagious, but because their symptoms are so slight, they don't see a doctor. There are probably thousands of cases of polio every year that are so mild they are never diagnosed."

"So I caught it from someone who didn't know they had it," I said. It seemed unbelievable to me that anyone could have polio and not realize it.

Mail was delivered every afternoon, and I looked forward to a daily letter from my mother. Most of her letters were signed, "Love, Mother and Dad," but a few were signed with a muddy paw print.
[endPage=38]

[startPage=39]
Those were from B.J., telling me he had chased a cat or buried a bone. Grandpa depended on Mother to tell me any news, but he sent a gift each week when my parents came to visit.

Art wrote about college life and sent me a new teddy bear just like the one that got burned.

One mail delivery included a big brown packet from my school in Austin. When I opened it, dozens of letters from my classmates tumbled out. Karen wrote about a student petition to change the rules so girls could wear pants to school instead of the required dresses. Another girl complained that her new haircut was too short; a third was outraged at the basketball referee.

I had the strange feeling that I was reading about a different lifetime. The other kids were upset about such unimportant things. Just a few weeks earlier, I, too, had worried about clothes and hair and the basketball team. Now none of this mattered. I had faced death. I had lived with excruciating pain and with loneliness and uncertainty about the future. Bad haircuts and lost ball games would never bother me again.

Even the petition to allow girls to wear pants to school, a cause I supported, failed to excite me. I would happily wear a gunnysack, I thought, if I could walk into the school.
[endPage=39]

[startPage=40]
"Be glad you aren't here," one boy wrote. "You aren't missing anything but hard tests and too much homework."

He's wrong, I thought. I miss my own room and playing with B.J. and helping Grandpa in the garden. I miss my piano lessons and roller-skating and licking the pan when Mother makes fudge. I miss visiting my aunts and uncles. I miss riding my bike with Karen and playing Monopoly with Richard.

I put the letters aside, knowing I was changed forever. My world was now the hospital. Would I have anything in common with my classmates when I went home? I felt closer now to Tommy, whose head was the only part of him I had ever seen, than I did to the kids who used to be my dearest friends. Tommy understood what it was like to have polio; my school friends could never know.
[endPage=40]
